Psychological continuity
and fission.
What's fission? Imagine this
scenario. It's kind of a
futuristic scenario I guess.
So here's Ahmed and
unfortunately, he has a real
problem with various parts of
his body and what happens to
people like Ahmed in the
future is very simple. They have
a body donor someone who no
longer needs their body because
they've entered a kind of
virtual phase of their lives and
the body donor hands over the
body and the brain of Ahmed is
translated. No, it's
not translated, it is transferred to
the new body. So this is how it
happens, and in Ahmed’s case
actually is the body of a woman,
and so he decides to transition
and he becomes Beatrice.
But the thing about the brain
transfer operation is that
it's a little bit risky.
People
have two brain hemispheres.
They just need one. So the safe
thing to do here is to take
half the brain of Ahmed,
transfer it into the donor
body and just see what
happens, right? And he still
got half a brain in reserve
just in case.
Now he's kind of a wealthy guy,
So what he does is actually
short cuts the process and takes
each brain hemisphere and has it
transplanted into two different
bodies simultaneously. Because
you know, he figures he just
wants to be on the safe side.
But as it happens,
both of those brain
transplants work
beautifully.
So now there are two people,
Beatrice and Caitlin. (The other
one was also woman.)
He's become
two women, but it's confusing.
How can one person become two?
Well, that's fission.
Now on the face of it, this is a
perfectly coherent story.
It started off as a single
person a underwent some fission
and an he became two people.
Doesn't seem particularly
complex or confusing. Well, it's
probably confusing for people
who knew Ahmed before, but
for us, standing back
looking at it, theoretically
it's fine. Now here’s the really
important thing. Beatrice is not
identical to Caitlin. These are
clearly two distinct people.
They have two separate lives.
They live in two different parts
of town. They actually don't
like each other. They did date
for awhile, but that was weird.
They fell out. They broke up,
couldn't workout. Who would do
the dishes. These are definitely
distinct people, right? You
can't really fight with
somebody. Who is yourself? Not
very easily anyway. I tried it,
it doesn't end well. Beatrice
and Caitlin clearly distinct
people. Now if we're thinking
about numerical identity. We
know that Beatrice is not
identical to Caitlin. It follows
from that that we can't maintain
both. There are meters identical
to Beatrice and the arm. It is
identical to Caitlin, but since
the case is so symmetrical.
Seems like if we reject, Amit is
identical to Beatrice or Ahmed
is identical to Kate, then we
should reject both of those,
right? There can be no reason.
By the way the case is
constructed for accepting one of
those and rejecting the others.
It follows then.
Since Beatrice and Caitlin are
distinct. Individuals
numerically distinct Beatrice in
Ahmed on numerically distinct
and Beatrice. Sorry and
Caitlin and Ahmed and
numerically distinct as well.
So why is this
interesting to us?
Well, let me just. Show you
something that's clearly closely
related. We know that
Beatrice and Caitlin are not
numerically identical. There
clearly distinct people.
But because of this brain
transplant stuff, we also know
that arm it is psychologically
continuous with Beatrice.
And with Caitlin.
If we add in the
psychological continuity view
of personal identity, I'm
sure you remember that that
says, roughly speaking. But
if you've got a person at a
time in a thing at a time.
And the.
Thing remembers events which
were experienced by the person,
or Conversely the personal thing
or identical. We put those four
things together. We get an
inconsistent quartet. Now what
I want you to do is to turn to
the personal people that you
are with when you're watching
this video. If there are any.
If not, you're going to have
to think much better than
other people. Take 90 seconds.
I'm just trying to explain to
each other as clearly as you can
why this quartet is
inconsistent. Explain why the
quartet is inconsistent as
clearly as you can go.
Psychological continuity views
about personal identity.
According to those views, if we
accept that those are true.
Then we're saying that if you
have a person at one time
everything at another time and
the thing has memories
concerning events which the
person experienced underwent,
then the two are identical.
The person is the thing.
That means that from the fact
that our mid is psychologically
continuous with Beatrice, that's
what the brain transplant thing
did for us, together with the
psychological continuity view,
we can infer the Ahmed is
Beatrice. And likewise, we
cannot. Further Ahmed is
Caitlin. But now of course we've
got a contradiction. We've got
an inconsistent quartet. We
cannot maintain all four claims.
It looks on the face that then
that we have to reject the
psychological continuity view
since the 1st three claims on
the face of it are all true.
So where is this long discussion
taking us? Very simple? If
fission is possible.
If arm, it can be
psychologically continuous
with two distinct people,
Beatrice and Caitlin.
Then the psychological
continuity view of personal
identity must be false.
But is fishing really possible?
Well, I think we can show pretty
convincingly that it is. Here's
the thought. The removal of one
brain hemisphere. Would not
break psychological
continuity, right? So you
could have an operation where
part of your brain was
removed, even half of it.
Wouldn't change you.
You might also have an
identical twin whose
brain had been removed.
Your brain could be transplanted
into the Indentical.
Twins body into that deep brain
body, nothing impossible.
They're very difficult to do
beyond current medical practice.
But far as metaphysics go, this
is clearly possible.
Successfully transplanting your
brain into your Twins body would
ensure psychological
psychological continuity. Yes,
it would be upsetting. Yes,
there would be some changes to
you, but there would be some
things that were continuous
psychologically. Before
and after the operation.
The removal and destruction
of a brain hemisphere
followed by the transport of
the other hemisphere would
ensure psychological
continuity. That's pretty
clear. That follows from the
things that we've said
already.
All of that, I think should
be pretty straightforward,
uncontroversial, from a
metaphysical POV, medically,
there are some questions, but
metaphysically were fine.
Follows just from those
claims that you could be
psychologically continuous
with two distinct people,
metaphysically speaking.
So it seems very clear
that psychological fishing
is possible.
That tells us, of course, that
the psychological continuity
view. Of personal identity
must be false.
How do people react to this
news? Now that's really
interesting. Do you remember
when we were thinking about
biological continuity? Then we
came up with an inconsistent
triad and one response proposed
by Olson. Was to reject the
idea that identity went with
moral responsibility.
Turns out that proponents of
psychological continuity have a
complementary move. This is
really interesting fact.
What the?
Proponents of
psychological
continuity sometimes
say is look.
The identity relation is just
not what matters in survival.
Instead, what matters this is
Shoemaker, proponent of
psychological continuity view.
What matters has to consist in
psychological continuity and or
psychological connectedness.
As long as the relations of
psychological continuity hold
between me now and some other
thing in the future.
Regardless of whether or
not that holds one to one,
what happens is just as
good as ordinary survival.
So what does she make are
suggesting? What shoe
makers suggesting?
Is that?
Psychological continuity views
are not really views about
identity at all.
The topic is not personal
identity, it's personal
survival.
In the sense that matters, and I
suppose this means kind of
ethically and for practical
purposes. Psychological
continuity is what ensures
survival.
So Schumacher calls this the
identity. Doesn't matter if you.
So it's very neat now. We've
seen a conic division between
proponents of biological
continuity and proponents of
psychological continuity.
Proponents of biological
continuity will tell you that.
Identity is a matter of.
Biology.
An identity doesn't matter from
the point of view of moral
responsibility compatible with
that proponents of psychological
continuity will tell you that
psychological continuity doesn't
tell you anything about
numerical identity, but it is
what matters from a moral point
of view. And it is what matters
for ordinary thinking about
personal survival. So strangely,
in philosophy, we seem to have
reached a point where there is
actually quite broad agreement.
About personal identity.